Add new article: YDB data source for Grafana. (#1582)
ydb-platform/ydb: ydb/docs/en/core/integrations/grafana.md

> # YDB data source for Grafana

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# {{ ydb-short-name }} data source for Grafana
```

## Version compatibility

Plugin requires `v9.2` and higher of Grafana.

The YDB data source plugin allows you to query and visualize YDB data from within Grafana.

## Installation

For detailed instructions on how to install the plugin on Grafana Cloud or locally, please checkout the [Plugin installation docs](https://grafana.com/docs/grafana/latest/plugins/installation/).

## Configuration

### YDB user for the data source

Set up an YDB user account with readonly permission [(more about permissions)](../cluster/access.md) and access to databases and tables you want to query. Please note that Grafana does not validate that queries are safe. Queries can contain any SQL statement including modification instructions.

### Data transfer protocol support

> The plugin supports `GRPCS` and `GRPC` transport protocols. Please note that you need to provide TLS/SSL certificate when using `grpcs`.

Reviewer 2: @asmyasnikov Could you please clarify this?

> The plugin supports `GRPCS` and `GRPC` transport protocols. Please note that you need to provide TLS/SSL certificate when using `grpcs`.

Reviewer 3: I think if some user will connect to new unknown ydb cluster from grafana backend - this backend not knows about new destination and their certificates. Thats why certificates must be defined from user over UI

> The plugin supports `GRPCS` and `GRPC` transport protocols. Please note that you need to provide TLS/SSL certificate when using `grpcs`.

Author: Переписали.

### Manual configuration

Once the plugin is installed on your Grafana instance, follow [these instructions](https://grafana.com/docs/grafana/latest/datasources/add-a-data-source/) to add a new YDB data source, and enter configuration options.

### With a configuration file

It is possible to configure data sources using configuration files with Grafana’s provisioning system. To read about how it works, including all the settings that you can set for this data source, refer to [Provisioning Grafana data sources](https://grafana.com/docs/grafana/latest/administration/provisioning/#data-sources).

Plugin supports different authentication types [authentication types](../reference/ydb-sdk/auth.md).

Here is an example for this data source using user/password:

```yaml
apiVersion: 1
datasources:
  - name: YDB
    type: ydbtech-ydb-datasource
    jsonData:
      authKind: "UserPassword",
      endpoint: 'grpcs://endpoint',
      dbLocation: 'location',
      user: 'username',
    secureJsonData:
      password: 'userpassword',

>       certificate: 'certificate',

Reviewer 2: `dbLocation` is like `/eu-central1/b1g/etnudu2n`.
`certificate` is a content of `*.pem` file

```

Here are fields that are supported in connection configuration:

```typescript
    jsonData:
      authKind: "Anonymous" | "ServiceAccountKey" | "AccessToken" | "UserPassword" | "MetaData";
      endpoint: string;
      dbLocation: string;
      user?: string;
    secureJsonData:
      serviceAccAuthAccessKey?: string;
      accessToken?: string;
      password?: string;
      certificate?: string;
```

## Building queries

[YQL dialect](../yql/reference/index.md) is used to query YDB.

> Queries can contain macros which simplify syntax and allow for dynamic parts.

Reviewer 2: Plugin will parse query text and before sending it to YDB, it will substitute variables and macroses it knows with particular values.

> Queries can contain macros which simplify syntax and allow for dynamic parts.

Reviewer: this needs to be reflected in the text, not in PR comments

The query editor allows you to get data in different representation: time series, table or logs.

### Time series

> Time series visualization options are selectable after adding to your query one field with `Date`, `Datetime` or `Timestamp` type and at least one field with `number` type. You can select time series visualizations using the visualization options. Grafana interprets timestamp rows without explicit time zone as UTC. Any other column is treated as a value column.

Reviewer 2: Supported data types are listed here https://github.com/ydb-platform/ydb-grafana-datasource-plugin/blob/e76a1a326104881eaf44c6bf125575f1a3f4e1e7/pkg/converters/converters.go#L24 (keys of the object `Converters`)

#### Multi-line time series

To create multi-line time series, the query must return at least 3 fields in the following order:

> - field 1: time field

Reviewer 2: `Date`, `Datetime` or `Timestamp` may be provided

- field 2: value to group by
- field 3+: the metric values

For example:

```sql
SELECT `timestamp`, `requestTime`, AVG(`responseStatus`) AS `avgRespStatus`
FROM `/database/endpoint/my-logs`
GROUP BY `requestTime`, `timestamp`
ORDER BY `timestamp`
```

### Tables

> Table visualizations will always be available for any valid YDB query.

Reviewer 2: Result sets are not supported.
Complex data types should be tested - if you provide me with query examples, I'll take a look. By default all unknown types should be treated as strings.

### Visualizing logs with the Logs Panel

> To use the Logs panel your query must return a time and string values. You can select logs visualizations using the visualization options.

Reviewer 2: `Date`, `Datetime` or `Timestamp` are supported.
And to use value as log line, it should be casted to String like  `CAST(query_id AS String) `

> To use the Logs panel your query must return a time and string values. You can select logs visualizations using the visualization options.

Reviewer 2: Could you please provide me with query example?

By default only the first text field will be represented as log line, but this can be customized using query builder.

### Macros

To simplify syntax and to allow for dynamic parts, like date range filters, the query can contain macros.

Here is an example of a query with a macro that will use Grafana's time filter:

```sql
SELECT `timeCol`
FROM `/database/endpoint/my-logs`
WHERE $__timeFilter(`timeCol`)
```

| Macro                                        | Description                                                                                                                      | Output example                                                                                  |
| -------------------------------------------- | -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- | ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |

> | _$\_\_timeFilter(columnName)_                | Replaced by a conditional that filters the data (using the provided column) based on the time range of the panel in microseconds | `foo >= CAST(1636717526371000 AS TIMESTAMP) AND foo <=  CAST(1668253526371000 AS TIMESTAMP)' )` |

Reviewer: does it indeed support only columns, or expressions are allowed too?

Reviewer 2: Only column name may be used here.

Reviewer: Then a hint saying to use a subquery if you need an expression would be useful.

Reviewer 2: sorry, I can't catch what do you want to see here :(

| _$\_\_fromTimestamp_                         | Replaced by the starting time of the range of the panel casted to Timestamp                                                      | `CAST(1636717526371000 AS TIMESTAMP)`                                                           |
| _$\_\_toTimestamp_                           | Replaced by the ending time of the range of the panel casted to Timestamp                                                        | `CAST(1636717526371000 AS TIMESTAMP)`                                                           |

> | _$\_\_varFallback(condition, \$templateVar)_ | Replaced by the first parameter when the template variable in the second parameter is not provided.                              | `condition` or `templateVarValue`                                                               |

Reviewer: needs an example

Author: Примеры добавлены.

### Templates and variables

> To add a new YDB query variable, refer to [Add a query variable](https://grafana.com/docs/grafana/latest/variables/variable-types/add-query-variable/).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To add a new {{ ydb-short-name }} query variable, refer to [Add a query variable](https://grafana.com/docs/grafana/latest/variables/variable-types/add-query-variable/).
```

> After creating a variable, you can use it in your YDB queries by using [Variable syntax](https://grafana.com/docs/grafana/latest/variables/syntax/).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After creating a variable, you can use it in your {{ ydb-short-name }} queries by using [Variable syntax](https://grafana.com/docs/grafana/latest/variables/syntax/).
```

### Configuration via UI

Once the plugin is installed on your Grafana instance, follow [these instructions](https://grafana.com/docs/grafana/latest/datasources/add-a-data-source/) to add a new {{ ydb-short-name }} data source, and enter configuration options.

### Configuration with provisioning system

Alternatively, it is possible to configure data sources using configuration files with Grafana’s provisioning system. To read about how it works, including all the settings that you can set for this data source, refer to [Provisioning Grafana data sources](https://grafana.com/docs/grafana/latest/administration/provisioning/#data-sources) documentation.

### Authentication

The Grafana plugin supports various authentication [authentication methods](../reference/ydb-sdk/auth.md).

Below is an example config for authenticating a {{ ydb-short-name }} data source using username and password:

```yaml
apiVersion: 1
datasources:
  - name: YDB
    type: ydbtech-ydb-datasource
    jsonData:
      authKind: "UserPassword"
      endpoint: 'grpcs://<hostname>:2135'

>       dbLocation: '/eu-central1/b1g/db-location'

Reviewer: it's better not to use real values as examples

Author: Учли

      user: '<username>'
    secureJsonData:
      password: '<userpassword>'

>       certificate: 'content of *.pem file'

Reviewer: this sounds like a placeholder but unlike other places `<..>` brackets are missing

Author: Учли

>       certificate: 'content of *.pem file'

Reviewer: where to get this pem file?

Reviewer 2: We may give a link to https://ydb.tech/docs/en/concepts/connect#tls-cert

```

Here are fields that are supported in connection configuration:

| Name  | Description         |         Type          |
| :---- | :------------------ | :-------------------: |
| authKind | Authentication type |       `"Anonymous" \| "ServiceAccountKey" \| "AccessToken" \| "UserPassword" \| "MetaData"`        |
| endpoint | Database endpoint  | `string` |
| dbLocation | Database location  | `string` |
| user | User name  | `string` |
| serviceAccAuthAccessKey | Service account access key  | `string` (secured) |
| accessToken | OAuth access token  | `string` (secured) |
| password | User password  | `string` (secured) |
| certificate | Content of *.pem file  | `string` (secured) |

## Building queries

> {{ ydb-short-name }} is queried with a SQL dialect named [YQL](../yql/reference/index.md).
> Queries can contain macros which simplify syntax and allow for dynamic parts. It may be two kind of macro - [grafana-level](#macros) and ydb-level. Plugin will parse query text and, before sending it to YDB, substitute variables and grafana-level macroses with particular values. After that ydb-level macroses will be treated by ydb. 
> The query editor allows you to get data in different representation: time series, table or logs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
{{ ydb-short-name }} is queried with a SQL dialect named [YQL](../yql/reference/index.md).
Queries can contain macros which simplify syntax and allow for dynamic parts. There are two kinds of macros - [Grafana-level](#macros) and {{ ydb-short-name }}-level. The plugin will parse query text and, before sending it to {{ ydb-short-name }}, substitute variables and Grafana-level macros with particular values. After that {{ ydb-short-name }}-level macroses will be treated by {{ ydb-short-name }} server-side. 
The query editor allows to get data in different representations: time series, table or logs.
```

Author: Учли

> ### Time series (../_assets/grafana/time-series.png)

Reviewer: why the image is inside the header?

Reviewer 2: oops...

Author: Поправили

> Time series visualization options are selectable if the query returns at least one field with `Date`, `Datetime`, or `Timestamp` type type and at least one field with `int`, `uint`, `double` or `float` type. Then you can select time series visualization options. Grafana interprets timestamp rows without explicit time zone as UTC. Any other column is treated as a value column.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Time series visualization options are selectable if the query returns at least one field with `Date`, `Datetime`, or `Timestamp` type and at least one field with `int`, `uint`, `double` or `float` type. Then you can select time series visualization options. Grafana interprets timestamp rows without an explicit time zone as UTC. Any other column is treated as a value column.
```

> Time series visualization options are selectable if the query returns at least one field with `Date`, `Datetime`, or `Timestamp` type type and at least one field with `int`, `uint`, `double` or `float` type. Then you can select time series visualization options. Grafana interprets timestamp rows without explicit time zone as UTC. Any other column is treated as a value column.

Reviewer: YQL integer data types all have sizes in bits in their name - is this supposed to mean that all sizes are supported? I'd make it more explicit. Also, their names all start with capital letters, so for example `double` -> `Double`.

> Time series visualization options are selectable if the query returns at least one field with `Date`, `Datetime`, or `Timestamp` type type and at least one field with `int`, `uint`, `double` or `float` type. Then you can select time series visualization options. Grafana interprets timestamp rows without explicit time zone as UTC. Any other column is treated as a value column.

Reviewer: What does a row with/without explicit timezone mean? In YDB there are separate TzDate/TzDatetime/TzTimestamp data types for timezone handling, from the previous sentence it sounds like they are not supported.

Reviewer 2: TzDate/TzDatetime/TzTimestamp are not supported.
`What does a row with/without explicit timezone mean?` - I don't understand your question. If no explicit timezone column is given, you won't get Time series view.

#### Multi-line time series

To create multi-line time series, the query must return at least 3 fields in the following order:

- field 1: `Date`, `Datetime` or `Timestamp`
- field 2: value to group by
- field 3+: the metric values

For example:

```sql
SELECT `timestamp`, `requestTime`, AVG(`responseStatus`) AS `avgRespStatus`
FROM `/database/endpoint/my-logs`
GROUP BY `requestTime`, `timestamp`
ORDER BY `timestamp`
```

### Tables (../_assets/grafana/table.png)

> Table visualizations will always be available for any valid {{ ydb-short-name }} query (multi result sets are not supported).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Table visualizations will always be available for any valid {{ ydb-short-name }} query (multiple result sets are not supported).
```

Author: Переделали предложение.

> Table visualizations will always be available for any valid {{ ydb-short-name }} query (multi result sets are not supported).

Reviewer: what will happen for queries that do not return a result set like `INSERT INTO`?

Reviewer 2: Modifying queries are not supported from within Grafana.

To use the Logs panel your query must return a `Date`, `Datetime` or `Timestamp` and `String` values. You can select logs visualizations using the visualization options.

By default, only the first text field will be represented as log line. This can be customized using the query builder.

### Macros

To simplify syntax and to allow for dynamic parts, like date range filters, the query can contain macros.

Here is an example of a query with a macro that will use Grafana's time filter:

```sql
SELECT `timeCol`
FROM `/database/endpoint/my-logs`
WHERE $__timeFilter(`timeCol`)
```

| Macro                                        | Description                                                                                                                      | Output example                                                                                  |
| -------------------------------------------- | -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- | ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |

> | _$\_\_timeFilter(columnName)_                | Replaced by a conditional that filters the data (using the provided column) based on the time range of the panel in microseconds | `foo >= CAST(1636717526371000 AS TIMESTAMP) AND foo <=  CAST(1668253526371000 AS TIMESTAMP)' )` |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| `$__timeFilter(columnName)`                | Replaced by a conditional that filters the data (using the provided column) based on the time range of the panel in microseconds | `foo >= CAST(1636717526371000 AS TIMESTAMP) AND foo <=  CAST(1668253526371000 AS TIMESTAMP)' )` |
```
and similarly below

Author: Учтено.

| _$\_\_fromTimestamp_                         | Replaced by the starting time of the range of the panel casted to Timestamp                                                      | `CAST(1636717526371000 AS TIMESTAMP)`                                                           |
| _$\_\_toTimestamp_                           | Replaced by the ending time of the range of the panel casted to Timestamp                                                        | `CAST(1636717526371000 AS TIMESTAMP)`                                                           |

> | _$\_\_varFallback(condition, \$templateVar)_ | Replaced by the first parameter when the template variable in the second parameter is not provided.                              | _$\_\_varFallback('foo', \$bar)_ `foo` if variable `bar` is not provided, or `bar`'s value                                                               |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| _$\_\_varFallback(condition, \$templateVar)_ | Replaced by the first parameter when the template variable in the second parameter is not provided.                              | _$\_\_varFallback('foo', \$bar)_ `foo` if variable `bar` is not provided, or `$bar`'s value                                                               |
```

Author: Учли.

# {{ ydb-short-name }} data source for Grafana

The [{{ ydb-short-name }} data source plugin](https://grafana.com/grafana/plugins/ydbtech-ydb-datasource/) allows you to use [Grafana](https://grafana.com) to query and visualize data from {{ ydb-short-name }}.

## Installation

Prerequisites: the plugin requires `v9.2` and higher of Grafana.

Follow the Grafana's [plugin installation docs](https://grafana.com/docs/grafana/latest/plugins/installation/) to install a plugin named `ydb-grafana-datasource-plugin`.

## Configuration

### {{ ydb-short-name }} user for the data source

Set up an {{ ydb-short-name }} user account with **read-only** permissions [(more about permissions)](../cluster/access.md) and access to databases and tables you want to query. 

{% note warning %}

Please note that Grafana does not validate that queries are safe. Queries can contain any SQL statements including data modification instructions.

{% endnote %}

### Data transfer protocol support

> The plugin supports [gRPC and gRPCS](https://grpc.io/) transport protocols. If self-signed certificates are used on your {{ ydb-short-name }} cluster, specify the [Certificate Authority](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Certificate_authority) certificate, through which they were released.

Reviewer 2: Removed this comment from here. It seems it should be only in table with connection settings.

### Configuration via UI

Once the plugin is installed on your Grafana instance, follow [these instructions](https://grafana.com/docs/grafana/latest/datasources/add-a-data-source/) to add a new {{ ydb-short-name }} data source, and enter configuration options.

### Configuration with provisioning system

Alternatively, it is possible to configure data sources using configuration files with Grafana’s provisioning system. To read about how it works, including all the settings that you can set for this data source, refer to [Provisioning Grafana data sources](https://grafana.com/docs/grafana/latest/administration/provisioning/#data-sources) documentation.

### Authentication

> The Grafana plugin supports various authentication [authentication methods](../reference/ydb-sdk/auth.md).

Reviewer 2: I specidied the list of supported methods.

Below is an example config for authenticating a {{ ydb-short-name }} data source using username and password:

```yaml
apiVersion: 1
datasources:
  - name: YDB
    type: ydbtech-ydb-datasource
    jsonData:
      authKind: "UserPassword"
      endpoint: 'grpcs://<hostname>:2135'
      dbLocation: '/location/to/db'
      user: '<username>'
    secureJsonData:
      password: '<userpassword>'
      certificate: |
        <overall content of *.pem file>
```

Here are fields that are supported in connection configuration:

| Name  | Description         |         Type          |
| :---- | :------------------ | :-------------------: |

> | authKind | Authentication type |       `"Anonymous" \| "ServiceAccountKey" \| "AccessToken" \| "UserPassword" \| "MetaData"`        |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| authKind | Authentication type |       `"Anonymous"`, `"ServiceAccountKey"`, `"AccessToken"`, `"UserPassword"`, `"MetaData"`        |
```

Author: Учтено в PR.

The query editor allows to get data in different representations: time series, table or logs.

### Time series { #time-series }

Time series visualization options are selectable if the query returns at least one field with `Date`, `Datetime`, or `Timestamp` type (for now work with time supported only in UTC format) and at least one field with `Int64`, `Int32`, `Int16`, `Int8`, `Uint64`, `Uint32`, `Uint16`, `Uint8`, `Double` or `Float` type. Then you can select time series visualization options. Grafana interprets timestamp rows without an explicit time zone as UTC. Any other column is treated as a value column.

![Time-series](../_assets/grafana/time-series.png)

#### Multi-line time series

To create multi-line time series, the query must return at least 3 fields in the following order:

- field 1: `Date`, `Datetime` or `Timestamp`

> - field 2: value to group by

Reviewer 2: Sorry, I don't understand your question and can't catch how to check it.

> - field 2: value to group by

Reviewer: @Raubzeug above on L78 it says "Any other column is treated as a value column.", while here it says that only `field 2` is the value column, so it's confusing how this is supposed to work.

> - field 2: value to group by

Reviewer 2: We say here, that field 2 is a value TO GROUP BY. But of course it's possible to group by more values.

Here is an example of a query with a macro that will use Grafana's time filter:

```sql
SELECT `timeCol`
FROM `/database/endpoint/my-logs`
WHERE $__timeFilter(`timeCol`)
```

```sql
SELECT `timeCol`
FROM `/database/endpoint/my-logs`
WHERE $__timeFilter(`timeCol` + INTERVAL("PT24H"))
```

| Macro                                        | Description                                                                                                                      | Output example                                                                                  |
| -------------------------------------------- | -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- | ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| `$__timeFilter(columnName)`                | Replaced by a conditional that filters the data (using the provided column or expression) based on the time range of the panel in microseconds | `foo >= CAST(1636717526371000 AS TIMESTAMP) AND foo <=  CAST(1668253526371000 AS TIMESTAMP)' )` |

> | `$__fromTimestamp`                         | Replaced by the starting time of the range of the panel casted to Timestamp                                                      | `CAST(1636717526371000 AS TIMESTAMP)`                                                           |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| `$__fromTimestamp`                         | Replaced by the starting time of the range of the panel cast to Timestamp                                                      | `CAST(1636717526371000 AS TIMESTAMP)`                                                           |
```

> | `$__toTimestamp`                           | Replaced by the ending time of the range of the panel casted to Timestamp                                                        | `CAST(1636717526371000 AS TIMESTAMP)`                                                           |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| `$__toTimestamp`                           | Replaced by the ending time of the range of the panel cast to Timestamp                                                        | `CAST(1636717526371000 AS TIMESTAMP)`                                                           |
```

# {{ ydb-short-name }} data source for Grafana

The [{{ ydb-short-name }} data source plugin](https://grafana.com/grafana/plugins/ydbtech-ydb-datasource/) allows you to use [Grafana](https://grafana.com) to query and visualize data from {{ ydb-short-name }}.

## Installation

> Prerequisites: the plugin requires Grafana `v9.2` and higher.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Prerequisites: the plugin requires Grafana `v9.2` or higher.
```

Follow the Grafana's [plugin installation docs](https://grafana.com/docs/grafana/latest/plugins/installation/) to install a plugin named `ydb-grafana-datasource-plugin`.

## Configuration

### {{ ydb-short-name }} user for the data source

Set up an {{ ydb-short-name }} user account with **read-only** permissions [(more about permissions)](../cluster/access.md) and access to databases and tables you want to query. 

{% note warning %}

> Please note that Grafana does not validate that queries are safe. Queries can contain any SQL statements including data modification instructions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Please note that Grafana does not validate that queries are safe. Queries can contain any SQL statements, including data modification instructions.
```

{% endnote %}

### Data transfer protocol support

The plugin supports [gRPC and gRPCS](https://grpc.io/) transport protocols.

### Configuration via UI

Once the plugin is installed on your Grafana instance, follow [these instructions](https://grafana.com/docs/grafana/latest/datasources/add-a-data-source/) to add a new {{ ydb-short-name }} data source, and enter configuration options.

### Configuration with provisioning system

> Alternatively, it is possible to configure data sources using configuration files with Grafana’s provisioning system. To read about how it works, including all the settings that you can set for this data source, refer to [Provisioning Grafana data sources](https://grafana.com/docs/grafana/latest/administration/provisioning/#data-sources) documentation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Alternatively, Grafana's provisioning system allows you to configure data sources using configuration files. To read about how it works, including all the settings you can set for this data source, refer to the [Provisioning Grafana data sources](https://grafana.com/docs/grafana/latest/administration/provisioning/#data-sources) documentation.
```

### Authentication

> The Grafana plugin supports next [authentication methods](../reference/ydb-sdk/auth.md): Anonymous, Access Token, Metadata, Service Account Key and Static Credentials.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Grafana plugin supports the following [authentication methods](../reference/ydb-sdk/auth.md): Anonymous, Access Token, Metadata, Service Account Key and Static Credentials.
```

Below is an example config for authenticating a {{ ydb-short-name }} data source using username and password:

```yaml
apiVersion: 1
datasources:
  - name: YDB
    type: ydbtech-ydb-datasource
    jsonData:
      authKind: '<password>'
      endpoint: 'grpcs://<hostname>:2135'
      dbLocation: '<location_to_db>'
      user: '<username>'
    secureJsonData:
      password: '<userpassword>'
      certificate: |
        <full content of *.pem file>
```

Here are fields that are supported in connection configuration:

| Name  | Description         |         Type          |
| :---- | :------------------ | :-------------------: |
| authKind | Authentication type |       `"Anonymous"`, `"ServiceAccountKey"`, `"AccessToken"`, `"UserPassword"`, `"MetaData"`        |
| endpoint | Database endpoint  | `string` |
| dbLocation | Database location  | `string` |
| user | User name  | `string` |
| serviceAccAuthAccessKey | Service account access key  | `string` (secured) |
| accessToken | OAuth access token  | `string` (secured) |
| password | User password  | `string` (secured) |

> | certificate | If self-signed certificates are used on your {{ ydb-short-name }} cluster, specify the [Certificate Authority](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Certificate_authority) certificate, through which they were released  | `string` (secured) |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| certificate | If self-signed certificates are used on your {{ ydb-short-name }} cluster nodes, specify the [Certificate Authority](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Certificate_authority) certificate used to issue them  | `string` (secured) |
```

## Building queries

> {{ ydb-short-name }} is queried with a SQL dialect named [YQL](../yql/reference/index.md).
> Queries can contain macros which simplify syntax and allow for dynamic parts. There are two kinds of macros - [Grafana-level](#macros) and {{ ydb-short-name }}-level. The plugin will parse query text and, before sending it to {{ ydb-short-name }}, substitute variables and Grafana-level macros with particular values. After that {{ ydb-short-name }}-level macroses will be treated by {{ ydb-short-name }} server-side. 
> The query editor allows to get data in different representations: time series, table or logs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
{{ ydb-short-name }} is queried with a SQL dialect named [YQL](../yql/reference/index.md).
Queries can contain macros, which simplify syntax and allow for dynamic parts. There are two kinds of macros - [Grafana-level](#macros) and {{ ydb-short-name }}-level. The plugin will parse query text and, before sending it to {{ ydb-short-name }}, substitute variables and Grafana-level macros with particular values. After that {{ ydb-short-name }}-level macroses will be treated by {{ ydb-short-name }} server-side. 
The query editor allows to get data in different representations: time series, table, or logs.
```

### Time series

> Time series visualization options are selectable if the query returns at least one field with `Date`, `Datetime`, or `Timestamp` type (for now, working with time is supported only in UTC timezone) and at least one field with `Int64`, `Int32`, `Int16`, `Int8`, `Uint64`, `Uint32`, `Uint16`, `Uint8`, `Double` or `Float` type. Then you can select time series visualization options. Any other column is treated as a value column.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Time series visualization options are selectable if the query returns at least one field with `Date`, `Datetime`, or `Timestamp` type (for now, working with time is supported only in UTC timezone) and at least one field with `Int64`, `Int32`, `Int16`, `Int8`, `Uint64`, `Uint32`, `Uint16`, `Uint8`, `Double` or `Float` type. Then, you can select time series visualization options. Any other column is treated as a value column.
```

![Time-series](../_assets/grafana/time-series.png)

#### Multi-line time series

> To create multi-line time series, the query must return at least 3 fields in the following order:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To create a multi-line time series, the query must return at least 3 fields in the following order:
```

- field 1: `Date`, `Datetime` or `Timestamp`
- field 2: value to group by
- field 3+: the metric values

For example:

```sql
SELECT
    `timestamp`,
    `responseStatus`
    AVG(`requestTime`) AS `avgReqTime`
FROM `/database/endpoint/my-logs`
GROUP BY `responseStatus`, `timestamp`
ORDER BY `timestamp`
```

### Tables { #tables }

Table visualizations will always be available for any valid {{ ydb-short-name }} query that returns exactly one result set.

![Table](../_assets/grafana/table.png)

### Visualizing logs with the Logs Panel

> To use the Logs panel your query must return a `Date`, `Datetime` or `Timestamp` and `String` values. You can select logs visualizations using the visualization options.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To use the Logs panel, your query must return a `Date`, `Datetime`, or `Timestamp` value and a `String` value. You can select logs visualizations using the visualization options.
```

> By default, only the first text field will be represented as log line. This can be customized using the query builder.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Only the first text field will be represented as a log line by default. This behavior can be customized using the query builder.
```

![Logs](../_assets/grafana/logs.png)

### Macros

> To simplify syntax and to allow for dynamic parts, like date range filters, the query can contain macros.
> 
> Here is an example of a query with a macro that will use Grafana's time filter:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The query can contain macros to simplify syntax and allow for dynamic parts, like date range filters.

Here is an example of a query with a macro that will use Grafana's time filter:
```

```sql
SELECT `timeCol`
FROM `/database/endpoint/my-logs`
WHERE $__timeFilter(`timeCol`)
```

```sql
SELECT `timeCol`
FROM `/database/endpoint/my-logs`

> WHERE $__timeFilter(`timeCol` + INTERVAL("PT24H"))

Reviewer: ```suggestion
WHERE $__timeFilter(`timeCol` + Interval("PT24H"))
```

```

Macro                                        | Description                                                                                                                      | Output example                                                                                  |
| -------------------------------------------- | -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- | ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |

> | `$__timeFilter(expr)`                | Replaced by a conditional that filters the data (using the provided column or expression) based on the time range of the panel in microseconds | `foo >= CAST(1636717526371000 AS TIMESTAMP) AND foo <=  CAST(1668253526371000 AS TIMESTAMP)' )` |
> | `$__fromTimestamp`                         | Replaced by the starting time of the range of the panel cast to Timestamp                                                      | `CAST(1636717526371000 AS TIMESTAMP)`                                                           |
> | `$__toTimestamp`                           | Replaced by the ending time of the range of the panel cast to Timestamp                                                        | `CAST(1636717526371000 AS TIMESTAMP)`                                                           |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| `$__timeFilter(expr)`                | Replaced by a conditional that filters the data (using the provided column or expression) based on the time range of the panel in microseconds | `foo >= CAST(1636717526371000 AS Timestamp) AND foo <=  CAST(1668253526371000 AS Timestamp)' )` |
| `$__fromTimestamp`                         | Replaced by the starting time of the range of the panel cast to Timestamp                                                      | `CAST(1636717526371000 AS Timestamp)`                                                           |
| `$__toTimestamp`                           | Replaced by the ending time of the range of the panel cast to Timestamp                                                        | `CAST(1636717526371000 AS Timestamp)`                                                           |
```
